
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2332765/lock-mutex-semaphore-whats-the-difference

#critical region
region of memory shared by 2 or more processes

#lock
Lock allows only thread to enter the critical section. Lock is not shared with any other processes. All other threads are put to sleep.

no concept of thread ownership. no priority donation.

#mutex (mutex semaphore) (essentially same as binary semaphore)
Mutex is same as a lock but can be system wide (shared by multiple processes)
`Kernel object` used for allowing execution of just 1 active thread from many others, among different processes. Other non selected threads are put to sleep.
This object supports thread ownership, thread termination notification, not recursive and "priority inversion avoidance"


A mutex is essentially the same thing as a binary semaphore and sometimes uses the same basic implementation. The differences between them are:

Mutexes have a concept of an owner, which is the process that locked the mutex. Only the process that locked the mutex can unlock it. In contrast, a semaphore has no concept of an owner. Any process can unlock a semaphore.

Unlike semaphores, mutexes provide priority inversion safety. Since the mutex knows its current owner, it is possible to promote the priority of the owner whenever a higher-priority task starts waiting on the mutex.

Mutexes also provide deletion safety, where the process holding the mutex cannot be accidentally deleted. Semaphores do not provide this.


#semaphore (counting semaphore)
semaphore does the same as a mutex but allows `(a group)` x number of threads to enter, this can be used for example to limit the number of cpu, io, or ram intensive tasks running at the same time. 

maintains count between 0 and some max value, limiting number of threads that are simultaneously accessing a shared resource

A Semaphore is a lower-level object. You might well use a semaphore to implement a monitor. A semaphore essentially is just a `counter`. When the counter is positive, if a thread tries to acquire the semaphore then it is allowed, and the counter is decremented. When a thread is done then it releases the semaphore, and increments the counter.

If the counter is already zero when a thread tries to acquire the semaphore then it has to wait until another thread releases the semaphore. If multiple threads are waiting when a thread releases a semaphore then one of them gets it. The thread that releases a semaphore need not be the same thread that acquired it.

Interprocess capability however is not very safe since it lacks the following 'mutex' attributes: thread termination notification, recursion, priority inversion avoidance

You also have read/write locks that allow either unlimited number of readers or 1 writer at any given time

#spinlock
locks that busy waits. no thread sleep. mostly used at kernel level. inefficient for user level code.

#monitor
`object designed to be accessed from multiple threads`. So member functions/methods will enforce mutual exclusion. 






#Semaphore 

A semaphore is a synchronization tool for managing concurrent processes for complex mutual exclusion problems.


Semaphores are of two types −

1. Binary semaphore (take value 0 & 1 only) (mutex)
2. Counting semaphore (take nonnegative integer values) (semaphore)


Two standard operations, wait and signal are defined on the semaphore. Entry to the critical section is controlled by the wait operation and exit from a critical region is taken care by signal operation. The wait, signal operations are also called P and V operations. The manipulation of semaphore (S) takes place as following:

The wait command P(S) decrements the semaphore value by 1. If the resulting value becomes negative then P command is delayed until the condition is satisfied.

The V(S) i.e. signals operation increments the semaphore value by 1.

Mutual exclusion on the semaphore is enforced within P(S) and V(S). If a number of processes attempt P(S) simultaneously, only one process will be allowed to proceed & the other processes will be waiting.


P(S) or wait(S): 
If S > 0 then
   Set S to S-1
Else
   Block the calling process (i.e. Wait on S)

V(S) or signal(S): 
If any processes are waiting on S
   Start one of these processes
Else
   Set S to S+1


wait and signal are atomic

Thus semaphore is a simple yet powerful mechanism to ensure mutual exclusion among concurrent processes.





